---
layout: post
title: "Retrieving User Information With JavaScript"
date: 2015-10-07 16:45:25 -0500
comments: true
categories: 
---

Our bootcamp got to the point of understanding objects. Starting at ground zero, we learned operators, variables, conditionals, functions, and left off on objects. I could immediately see the importance of an object in programming. I mean, you can store anything in there, and save it all to one single object! I'm not sure if it was on purpose to get us right up to learning objects, but it proves to be a good place to end an intensive crash course, because once you understand objects, you can spread your wings and fly into the wide world of object-oriented programming, which is especially central in web development, and much of programming altogether. 

An eleven-week bootcamp can only get you so far. The downside was that we only learned core JavaScript, and never learned any client-side JavaScript. (I don't count learning Jquery because it was just magic to us). To help in my continued learning, I purchased "JavaScript, the Definitive Guide, 6th Edition" by David Flanagan, published by O'Reilly Media. It's a fantastic book. To be honest, I much prefer it to the book we used in my bootcamp, because it addresses the issue of object-oriented programming upfront. "JavaScript is an object-oriented language, but it is quite different than most" p. 8. That immediately cleared up confusion some of us had in class as to whether or not JavaScript was officially an object-oriented language. "JavaScripts fundamental datatype is the object....JavaScript objects are dynamic - properties can usually be added and deleted - but they can be used to simulate the static objects and 'structs' of statically typed languages....and are manipulated by reference rather than by value" (p 115). As a matter of fact, I was surprised to learn the function is actually an object type! (p 30) In JavaScript, ANYTHING that is not a number, string, boolean, null, or undefined is an object type. (p 29) This allows functions to be passed, manipulated, have properties set to them, invoke methods on them, just as objects. (p 163)

Then there was the confusion I had about the environment. I didn't understand why we always had to use console.log in JSFiddle to check our work. Studying on my own since graduation, I was surprised to learn that core JavaScript actually has no input or output capability. "Unlike most programming languages, the JavaScript language has no concept of input or output. It is designed to run as a scripting language in a host environment, and it is up to the host environment to provide mechanisms for communicating with the outside world." (<a href='https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/A_re-introduction_to_JavaScript' target='_blank'>MDN, 4th para</a>). While it is written as a complete language, it was written to interact with HTML, so it was never written with its own environment, but instead depends on the enviroment set up by the browser. JavaScript communicates with the browser through a browser API that translates the HTML into object form. The HTML object created by the browser API is called the Window object, and it is actually a host object to core JavaScript. The Window object is not technically JavaScript, as evidenced by the fact that you can turn JavaScript off in a web browser and web pages still load. The Window object becomes JavaScript, so to speak, when the web page html is loaded into the browser window, and there is also JavaScript code to interpret. The Window object becomes the host global enviroment for JavaScript. Remember "this" from my last post? Well "Window" replaces "this" in JavaScript once a web page is loaded into the browser window. After all, it's HTML that communicates to the user by displaying things in the browser window. The HTML is always the final ouput/input for a user, and thus the "HTML object" is the global, or top-level enviroment.

So how does this Window object, API, work? "Document Elements As Window Properties - If you name an element in your HTML document using the id attribute...the Window object is given a nonenumerable property whose name is the value of the id attribute and whose value is the HTML Element object that represents that document element. As we've already noted, the Window object serves as the global object at the top of the scope chain in client-side JavaScript, so this means that the id attributes you use in your HTML documents become global variables accessible to your scripts.....Any HTML element with an id attribute will become the value of a global variable, assuming the ID is not already used by the Window object." (p 351, 352) This is fairly fascinating because you don't have to actually use "document.getElementById." You can simply type in the id of the element you want to write code for, and the id is automatcally recognized because the id is ALREADY a global variable! Still, this is very bad practice, as you are messing with global variables. Since toying with global variables in never a good practice, the document object within the window object was created for the purpose of manipulating html elements.

"The Window object is the main entry point to all client-side JavaScript features and API's. It represents a web browser window or frame, and you can refer to it with the identifier 'window'...One of the most important properties of the Window object is document: it refers to a Document object that represents the content displayed in the window. The Document object has important methods such as getElementById(), which returns a single document element.....the element object returned by getElementById() has other important properties and methods that allow scripts to get is content, set the value of its attributes, and so on:" (pp 307, 308). The document object allows us to manipulate what is being displayed on the screen as much as we want to without ever altering the source code the window object initially retrieves from the URL. That's one of the beauties of objects within objects! 

All of the methods in the Document object to target html elements are not technically a part of JavaScript, but a part of the host environment. They are all a part of the Document object in the browser API. The event listeners are also a part of both the Window and Document objects. They can attach listeners to specific properties in the objects.

Core JavaScript has the ability to simulate static without really being static by making everything an object, while at the same time making objects mutable by reference alone. This quality makes it easy to see why JavaScript is a language more suited for the flexibility of interaction with the user than other languages, even though these characteristics can certainly cause confusion. Add to this that all input and output is not even handled by core JavaScript, that the methods to target the html elements, and listen to events, are not JavaScript, and it's ALSO easy to see why JavaScript is the world's most misunderstood language, often seen merely as a scripting tool, and not given respect as a real language. (See <a href='http://www.crockford.com/javascript/javascript.html' target='_blank'>Here</a>). After all, its the web API that's doing the real work, translating the html into object form, listening, and getting input and sending output, not JavaScript. Technically, these methods could be used by other languages. Since JavaScript is the language of choice for the internet, these Document and Window methods are referred to as client-side JavaScript, the host environment provided by the browser's API.

Let's see a fiddle that puts all of my learning in action:
 
<a href='http://jsfiddle.net/kevinbrianfahy/8115ztf3/3/' target='_blank'>My Fiddle</a>

The above fiddle I created gives an example of how JavaScript can obtain input/output through the Window API. Turns out, retrieving info entered in the input tag is very easy, as the Window API in the browser does all the work for you. I did nothing. It's standard object notation to get at the values the Document object holds. As soon as I enter an input tag and give it an id, that id becomes a property in the Window, and Document objects. The method of the Document Object, "getElementById()" allows me even easier access, as far as object notation. For the input object returned by that method, it has a property, "value", with a value that changes depending on what the user types in.  

In my fiddle, I only had to use core JavaScript to loop through an array I created of colors that used the "dark" prefix (for the outline color), and an if/else conditional to display different messages depending on the color the user typed in. The rest was actually methods of the Document object. I used the Document object methods to select the input element, and to listen anytime the user changed the value of that element; yet, it helped to use JavaScript because it allowed the document object to be manipulated by reference alone. All I had to do was point a variable to an object property, and anytime the variable changed, the document object changed with it. All I had to do was code `var newcolor = document.getElementById('choose').value; document.body.style.background = newcolor;` Hopefully this helps for anybody looking to grasp the nuances of JavaScript in use, its benefits, and it's very different input/output mechanism.

Certainly, the concept of windows in a computer is nothing new, yet the fiddle I created demonstrates the user ability to change the window contents depending on their preference, i.e. the window with JavaScript is dynamic. Windows are not usually dynamic; you cannot change what displays in a window. Even if you decide to bring up a different file in your desktop window, all the window can do is display from files that already exist. This is different. It allows the user to load into the window a non-existing file that is literally created as the user types it.


